Objects concept (#108)
exercism/jq: concepts/objects/about.md

# About

> To use terminology from other languages, a JSON object is a "hash" or "map" or "dictionary".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A JSON object is, to use terminology from other languages, a "hash", "map", or "dictionary".
```

I would start the article with the subject.

JSON defines an object as:

> An object is an unordered set of **name**/**value** pairs.
> An object begins with `{`left brace and ends with `}`right brace.
> Each _name_ is followed by `:`colon and the _name/value_ pairs are separated by `,`comma.

Further, the _name_ must be a string.
Another word for _name_ is _key_.

The _value_ can be of any JSON type.

> Different keys in the object can have values of different type, like this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different _values_ in the same object can be different type, like this example.
```

Using "keys" and "values" both in the sentence makes it a bit confusing about which you're talking about.

```json
{
  "name": "Jane",
  "age": 42,
  "pets": ["cat", "fish"],
  "address": {"street": "123 Main St", "city": "Springfield"}
}
```

Note that there **must not** be a comma following the _last_ key-value pair.

## Creating objects

Use braces to collect the name/value pairs.
Even though the names must be strings, they do not need to be quoted if the names are "identifier-like" (composed of alphanumeric characters and underscore, and not started with a digit).

```jq
{name: "Jane", age: 42}
```

It is valid to use keys that are not "identifier-like".
Just quote them.

```jq
{"first name": "Jane", "last name": "Lopez", age: 42}
```

If the name is the result of an expression, the expression **must** be in parentheses.

```sh
$ echo "Jane" | jq -Rc '{.: 42}'
jq: error: syntax error, unexpected '.' (Unix shell quoting issues?) at <top-level>, line 1:
{.: 42}
jq: error: May need parentheses around object key expression at <top-level>, line 1:
{.: 42}
jq: 2 compile errors

$ echo "Jane" | jq -Rc '{(.): 42}'
{"Jane":42}
```

### Short-hand notations

A couple of frequent cases for object construction have short-hand syntax.

> 1. Re-using key-value pairs from an input object.

Reviewer: I see consistent line endings prior to code blocks :smile:

Author: Lesson learned!

   ```sh
   $ jq -n '$ENV | {USER: .USER, EDITOR: .EDITOR}'
   {
     "USER": "glennj",
     "EDITOR": "vim"
   }
   ```

   `$ENV` is a object holding the name-value pairs of the environment.

   The repetitive `key: .key` pairs can be written as just `key`

   ```sh
   $ jq -n '$ENV | {USER, EDITOR}'
   {
     "USER": "glennj",
     "EDITOR": "vim"
   }
   ```
		
1. Similarly, there's a short-hand when using variables.

   ```sh
   $ jq -cn '"foo" as $a | "bar" as $b | {a: $a, b: $b}'
   {"a":"foo","b":"bar"}

   $ jq -cn '"foo" as $a | "bar" as $b | {$a, $b}'
   {"a":"foo","b":"bar"}
   ```

## Indexing

Values are retrieved from an object with _dot notation_.

```jq
{name: "Jane", age: 42} | .age    # => 42
```

If you cannot refer to the key as an identifier, use _bracket notation_.

```jq
"name" as $key | {name: "Jane", age: 42} | .$key    # => error
"name" as $key | {name: "Jane", age: 42} | .[$key]  # => "Jane"
```

> If the key is not in the object, the result is `null`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the key is not in the object, the result is `null`.
```

```jq
{name: "Jane", age: 42} | .sport  # => null
```

### Indexing nested values

You will discover that this is an action you need to do again and again when parsing results from API queries.

Given an object that contains array or object values, we can "chain" index expressions together.

```jq
{
  "name": "Jane",
  "age": 42,
  "pets": ["cat", "fish"],
  "address": {"street": "123 Main St", "city": "Springfield"}
} as $example

> |

Reviewer: Would this example be simpler without using variables?

Author: Do you mean something like this
```sh
$ cat example.json
{
  "name": "Jane",
  "age": 42,
  "pets": ["cat", "fish"],
  "address": {"street": "123 Main St", "city": "Springfield"}
}
$ jq '.pets[1]' example.json        # => "fish"
$ jq '.address.city' example.json   # => "Springfield"
```

Reviewer: ```
{
  "name": "Jane",
  "age": 42,
  "pets": ["cat", "fish"],
  "address": {"street": "123 Main St", "city": "Springfield"}
}
| (
  .pets[1],
  .addresss.city
)
```

  $example.pets[1],       # => "fish"
  $example.address.city   # => "Springfield"
```

> ## Adding or changing key-value pairs

Reviewer: Should "merge" be in the header?

Author: Hmm, I dunno.

I see that there's not a "changing" example, where I assign to an existing key.

Use the `=` assignment operator, with an index expression on the left-hand side.

```jq
{name: "Jane", age: 42} | .sport = "tennis"
# => {
#      "name": "Jane",
#      "age": 42,
#      "sport": "tennis"
#    }
```

The `+` operator will _merge_ objects:

```jq
{Richard: 54} + {Jane: 42}
# => {
#      "Richard": 54,
#      "Jane": 42
#    }
```

## Removing a key

> Use the `del` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `del` function to remove a key.
```

A handful of sections start with sentences that are continuations of the header without being fully formed on their own.

It returns the updated object.

```jq
{name: "Jane", age: 42} | del(.age)   # => {name: "Jane"}
```

## Membership

> - Test if the object `has` a key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To test if the object has a key, use the `has` function.
```

  ```jq
  {name: "Jane", age: 42} as $example
  |
    ($example | has("name")),    # => true
    ($example | has("sport"))    # => false
  ```

- Test if a key is `in` an object

  ```jq
  {name: "Jane", age: 42} as $example
  |
    ("name"  | in($example)),    # => true
    ("sport" | in($example))     # => false
  ```

> ## List all the keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## List the keys or values
```

> Use the `keys` function to output a list of all the keys.

Reviewer: Is it worth adding a `keys` example?

Note that `keys` will _sort_ the keys.
To retrieve the keys in the original order, use `keys_unsorted`.

There is no equivalent function to list all the _values_.
However the `.[]` filter outputs the object values as a _stream_, and that stream can be captured with the `[...]` array constructor.

```jq
[{first: "Jane", last: "Lopez", status: "awesome!"} | .[]]
# => ["Jane", "Lopez", "awesome!"]
```

## Iterating

- The `map_values(filter)` function applies the filter to each _value_ in the object.

  ```jq
  {first: "Jane", last: "Lopez", status: "awesome!"}
  | map_values(ascii_upcase)
  # => {"first": "JANE", "last": "LOPEZ", "status": "AWESOME!"}
  ```

- To iterate over an object, we must first convert it to an array of key-value objects.
  The `to_entries` function does that.

  ```jq
  {name: "Jane", age: 42} | to_entries'

>   ```
>   outputs
>   ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ```

  outputs

  ```json
```

  [
    {
      "key": "name",
      "value": "Jane"
    },
    {
      "key": "age",
      "value": 42
    }
  ]
  ```

  At this point, we can use the array iteration functions, like `map`.

- The `from_entries` function is the inverse: convert an array of key-value objects into an object

  ```jq
  [
    {"key":"name", "value":"Jane"},
    {"key":"age", "value":42}

>   ] | from_entries                  # =>{"name": "Jane", "age": 42}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ] | from_entries                  # => {"name": "Jane", "age": 42}
```

  ```

- To apply a filter to _each_ key-value pair in an object, use the `with_entries(filter)` function.

>   For example, with an object that maps a name to an age, to swap the keys and values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, given an object that maps a name to an age, the the key and value can be swapped as follows.
```
